---
title: Protobuf
date: 2021-04-02 20:04
tags: 
     - protobuf
---

## How to it apply to android?

- step 1: xxx_project/build.gradle

  ```groovy
  buildscript {
    dependencies {
      classpath 'com.google.protobuf:protobuf-gradle-plugin:0.8.15'
    }
  }
  ```

- step 2: xxx_module/build.gradle

  ```groovy
  plugins {
      id 'com.google.protobuf'
  }
  
  protobuf {
      proto {
          artifact = 'com.google.protobuf:protoc:3.15.3'
      }
      plugins {
          grpc {
              artifact = 'io.grpc.protoc-gen-grpc-java:1.36.0'
          }
      }
      generateProtoTasks {
          all().each { task ->
              task.builtins {
                  java { option 'lite' }
              }
              task.plugins {
                  grpc { option 'lite' }
              }
          }
      }
  }
  
  dependencies {
      implementation 'com.google.protobuf:protoc:3.15.3'
      implementation 'io.grpc:grpc-protobuf-lite:1.36.0'
      // implementation 'io.grpc:grpc-stub:1.36.0'
      // implementation 'io.grpc:grpc-okhttp:1.36.0'
  }
  ```

- step 3: create a new  directory (proto) to save all proto files.

  >  xxx_module/src/main/proto

- step 4: create a proto file (xxx.proto) in the previous created directory and that's all. 

## Protocol Buffers Language Guide(proto3)

### Introduction

What is all this about?

How to use protocol buffer language to structure protocol buffer data.

- .proto file syntax
- How to generate data access classes from .proto files.

### Proto File Syntax

#### Defining A Message Type

Proto file : demo.proto

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

message SearchRequest {
  string query = 1;
  int32 page_number = 2;
  int32 result_per_page = 3; 
}
```

- The first line specifies the syntax version:proto3, and must be the first non-empty,non-comment line of the file.
- Definite it with key word **message**, and specify the data fields.

##### Field Types

- scalar types: integer, string, bool, float, double, ...
- composite types: enumerations and other message types.

##### Assigning Field Numbers

Each field in the message definition has a **unique number**, which is used to identify the field in the **message binary format**,and should not be changed once the message type is in use.

| range       | length | note                                             |
| ----------- | ------ | ------------------------------------------------ |
| 1-15        | 1      | for frequently occurring elements                |
| 16-2047     | 2      |                                                  |
| 19000-19999 |        | reserved for the protocol buffers implementation |
| [1,2^99-1]  |        |                                                  |

##### Specifying Field Rules

- singular: have zero or one of this field, and this is the default field rule for proto3 syntax.
- repeated: this field can be repeated any number of times, and the order of the repeated values will be preserved.

##### Adding More Message Types

Multiple message types can be defined in a single .proto file, thus we can define multiple related messages to the same .proto:

```protobuf
message SearchRequest{
  string query = 1;
  int32 page_number = 2;
  int 32 result_per_page = 3;
}

message SearchResponse{
  ...
}
```

##### Adding Comments

- //
- /**/

```protobuf
/* represnet a search query */
message SearchRequest{
  string query = 1;
  int32 page_number = 2; // which page number do we want?
  int32 result_per_page = 3; // number of results to reture per page.
}
```

##### Reserved Fields

Specify the field numbers of the deleted fields are reserved.

**Note**: Field names and field numbers can't be mixed in the same reserved statement.

```protobuf
message Foo {
  reserved 2,15,9 to 11;
  reserved "foo", "bar";
}
```

##### What's Generated From .proto?

- Getting and setting field values
- Serializing messages to an output stream and parsing messages from an input stream.

#### Scalar Value Types

Check [Protocol Buffer Encoding]([Encoding  | Protocol Buffers  | Google Developers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/encoding)) about how the types are encoded when serializing messages.

#### Default Values

When a message is parsed, if the encoded message does not contain a particular singular element, the corresponding field in the parsed object is set to the default value for that field.

| type           | default value                                                |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| string         | empty string                                                 |
| byte           | empty byte                                                   |
| bool           | false                                                        |
| numeric        | zero                                                         |
| enums          | the first defined enum value                                 |
| message field  | language-dependent, check [generated code guide]([API Reference) |
| repeated field | empty(empty list)                                            |

#### Enumerations

```protobuf
message SearchRequest {
  string query = 1;
  int32 page = 2;
  int32 count = 3;
  enum Status {
    option allow_alias = true;
    ERROR = 0;
    SUCC = 1;
    DONE = 1;
    UNKOWN =2;
    PROCESSING = 3;
  }
}
```

- There must be a zero value, so that 0 can be used as a numeric **default value**.
- The zero value needs to be the first element.
- To define aliases by assigning the same value to different enum constants, set the **allow_alias** option to true.

##### Reserved Values

Specify the numeric values of the deleted entries are reserved.

Note: can't mix field names and numeric values in the same **reserved** statement.

```protobuf
enum Foo {
  reserved 2, 15, 9 to 11, 20 to max;
  reserved "FOO", BAR";
}
```

#### Using other Message Types

Use other message types as field types.

```protobuf
message SearchRespnse {  repeated Results = 1;}message Result {  string url = 1;  string title = 2;  repeated string snippets  = 3;}
```

##### Import Definitions

**This feature is not available in Java.**

- Use definitions from other .proto files by *importing* them. 

```protobuf
import "myproject/other_protos.proto"; // the import statement should be added to the top of the file.
```

- **import public** dependencies can be transitively relied by anyone importing the proto containing the **import public** statement.

```protobuf
// new.proto// all definitions are moved here.
```

```protobuf
// old.proto// this is the proto that all clients are importing import public "new.proto";import "other.proto";
```

```protobuf
// client.protoimport "old.proto";// use definitions from old.proto and new.proto, but not other.proto
```

##### Using proto2 Message Types

- It's possible to import **proto2** message types and use them in proto3 message, and vice versa.
- proto2 enums cannot be used directly in proto3 syntax, it's okay if an imported proto2 message uses them.

#### Nested Types

- define and use message types inside other message types.
- reuse message type outside its parent message type: *_parent_._type_*

```protobuf
message SearchResponse {  message Result {    string url = 1;    string title = 2;    repeated string snippets = 3;  }  repeated Result results = 1;}message SomeOtherMessage {  SerarcheResponse.Result result = 1;}// nest message deeplymessage Outer {  message MiddleAA {    message Inner {      int64 ival = 1;      bool booly = 2;    }  }    message MiddleBB {    message Inner {      int32 ival = 1;      bool booly = 2;    }  }  }
```

#### Updating A Message Type

- Don't change the field numbers of any existing fields.
- Any message serializing by code using "old" message format can still be parsed by new generated code; Similarly, messages created by new code can be parsed by old code too, old binaries simply ignore the new field when parsing.
- Fields can be removed, as long as the field number is not used again in the updated message type.  Rename the field: add the prefix "OBSOLETE_", or make the field number **reserved**, so that future users can't accidentally reuse the number.
- int32, uint32, int64, and bool are all compatible.
- sint32 and sint64 are compatible with each other but are not compatible with the other integer types.
- string and bytes are compatible as long as the bytes are valid UTF-8.
- ...

#### Unknown Fields

Unknown fields are well-formed protocol buffer serialized data representing field that the parser does not recognize.

- proto3 message always discard unknown fields during parsing.
- In version 3.5, preserve the known fields to match the proto2 behavior.
- In versions 3.5 and later, unknown fields are retained during parsing and included in the serialized output.

#### Any 

- The **Any** message type lets us use messages as embedded types without having their .proto definition.
- An **Any** contains an arbitrary serialized message as bytes, along with a URL that act as a globally unique identifier for and resolves to that message's type.
- To use the **Any** type, need to *import* **google/protobuf/any.proto**.

```protobuf
import "google/protobuf/any.proto";message ErrorStatus {  string message = 1;  repeated google.protobuf.Any details = 2;}
```

The default type URL for a given message type is: **type.google.com/_packagename_._messagename_**.

#### Oneof

- Oneof field are like regular fields except all the field in a oneof share memory, and at most one field can be set at the same time.
- Setting any member of the oneof automatically clears all the other members.
- Check which value in a oneof is set (if any) using a special **case()** or **WhichOneof()** method, depending on language.

```protobuf
message Order{  int32 id = 1;  string customer = 2;  oneof dish {    string breakfast = 3;    string lunch = 4;    string dinner = 5;  }  string address = 6;}
```

##### Oneof Features

- Setting a oneof field will automatically clear all other members of the oneof, only the *last* set field will still have a value.
- 

#### Maps

> map<key_type, value_type> map_field = N;

- **key_type** can be any integral or string type.

- **value_type** can be any type except another map.

  > map<string, User> users = 3;

- Map fields cannot be **repeated**

- Cannot rely on map items to being in a particular order.

- When parsing from the wire or when merging, if there are duplicate map keys the last key seen is used; When parsing a map from text format, parsing may fail if there are duplicate keys.

- when provide a key but no value for a map field, the behavior when the field is serialized is language-dependent. In C++, Java, and Python the default value for the type is serialized, while in other languages nothing is serialized.

#### Packages

Add an optional **package** specifier to a **.proto** file to prevent name clashes between protocol message types.

```protobuf
package com.huoergai;message User { ... }
```

```protobuf
message Order {  com.huoergai.User user = 1;}
```

**Packages and Name Resolution**

Type name resolution in the protocol buffer language works like C++: first the innermost scope is searched, then the next-innermost, and so on, with each package considered to be "inner" to its parent package.

#### Defining Services

If you want to use message types with an RPC system, you can define an RPC service interface in a **.proto** file and the protocol buffer compiler will generate service interface code and stubs in your chosen language.

```protobuf
service SearchService {  rpc Search(SearchRequest) returns (SearchResponse);}
```

#### JSON Mapping

  

#### Options

- **java_package** : The package you want to use for your generated Java classes, If no explicit **java_package** option is given, then by default the proto package will be used.
- **java_outer_classname** : The class name for the wrapper Java class you want to generate.
- **java_multiple_files** : If false, only a single java file will be generated for this .proto file.
- **optimized_for** : SPEED, CODE_SIZE, LITE_RUNTIME
- **cc_enable_arenas** : enable arean allocation for C++ generated code.
- **deprecated** 

### Generating Classes

To generate code you need to work with the message types defined in a **.proto** file, you need to run the protocol buffer compiler **protoc** on the **.proto**.

> protoc --proto_path=IMPORT_PATH --java_out=DST_DIR path/to/file.proto

- **IMPORT_PATH** specifies a directory in which to look for **.proto** file when resolving **import** directives. If omitted, the current directory is used. 
- **--xxx_out** : specifies the directory for generated code.